A handbook for journalists 1
Introduction
The Novel Coronavirus (2019-nCoV) was first identified in Wuhan, China, in December 2019.
By the end of March 2020, 205 countries had reported cases of Covid-19, the disease caused
by the virus, with about 700,000 cases of infection and 33,000 deaths across the world[1]
.
In India, the first case of 2019-nCoV was reported in Kerala in the last week of January 2020.
Since then, about 1353 cases have been reported from 27 States and Union Territories.[2]
 The State
of Tamil Nadu has reported more than 300 cases and 110 samples were under investigation[3]
at the time of writing. In Kerala, about 290 people are infected while 120,000 others are under
observation.[4]
The 2019 n-CoV poses a potential threat to children, families and communities at large. There are
direct health implications of the virus infection itself, as well as the risk of secondary morbidity and
mortality, inevitable disruption of basic services such as health, education and social protection
programmes, and severe impact on the economy and livelihoods of the marginalised people. The
total lockdown for 21 days announced by the Government of India had created fear, panic, anxiety
and stress among children and parents.
In order to reduce the spread of infection, it is essential to provide correct information and dispel
myths, misconceptions and misleading facts while encouraging social distancing, promoting
personal and hand hygiene and prompting the seeking of treatment for flu-like symptoms.
The media and other concerned agencies carry the important responsibility of appropriate risk
communication.
The media can play a significant role in raising awareness, dispelling myths and exposing misleading
information, as well as in promoting kindness, preventing stigmatisation and infusing confidence
among the people by disseminating fair and accurate reports. It can also contribute to creating a
positive atmosphere by putting out stories of effective coping and recovery.
This handbook for journalists, brought out jointly by the UNICEF Office for Tamil Nadu &
Kerala and the Press Institute of India, Chennai, is an attempt to empower journalists (editors and
reporters) to help India beat COVID-19 through well-thought-out, researched and responsible
articles and feature stories.
Note: This handbook is oriented specifically to the Novel Coronavirus pandemic. The basic
concepts, however, can be used as a blueprint, with appropriate modifications, for covering
any health issue that affects large sections of society.
1 As per WHO Sitrep 70
2 MOHFW, GOI, as on 31 March 2020,
3 Stopcoronatn.in
4 The Economic times, 26 March at 7:45 pm
4 Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) Pandemic
Chapter 1
Understanding the
Novel Coronavirus
To report effectively on any subject, a thorough understanding of the subject is imperative. In
this case, at the heart of the matter lies a virus.
A virus can generate so much news – community outbreak, cancellation of events, celebrities
falling ill, Sensex collapse, and so on and so forth. Journalists are professionally oriented to track
such developments and report on them. The steps to take to avoid getting infected by the virus,
the symptoms of infection, how to prepare the family to deal with an emergency, whom to contact
for services, etc are also good subjects for feature stories.
Readers and viewers want to know that what they are getting is immediate, relevant and accurate
information, which will help them manage risks and cope with the situation. Therefore, it is
essential that journalists have a correct understanding of the entire issue and all its implications.
Here is a brief outline, in question-and-answer form, to get you started:
What is the Novel Coronavirus?
The Novel Coronavirus (CoV) is a new strain of the Coronavirus. The disease caused by it,
first identified in Wuhan, China, has been named Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19)  –
‘CO’ stands for Corona, ‘VI’ for Virus, and ‘D’ for Disease. The virus is referred to as 2019 Novel
Coronavirus or 2019-nCoV.
The2019-nCoV is a part of the same family of viruses as the ones which cause Severe Acute
Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) and even some types of the common cold.
The World Health Organization (WHO) has declared COVID-19 to be a pandemic[1]
.
Characterising COVID-19 as a pandemic is not an indication that the virus has become deadlier.
Rather, it’s an acknowledgement of the geographical spread of the disease.
What are the symptoms of COVID-19 and how does the virus spread?
Symptoms can include fever, dry cough, a runny nose, fatigue and difficulty in breathing. Some
may display very mild symptoms or no symptoms at all. In more severe cases, infection can cause
pneumonia, grievous illness, and even death. Older people, and those with underlying medical
problems are at a higher risk of developing serious illness.
1 A ‘pandemic’ generally refers to an epidemic that has spread on a more global scale, affecting large numbers of people. Exactly
when enough places have enough infections to declare one isn’t a black-and-white decision. But generally, the WHO is looking for
sustained outbreaks in different continents. An ‘epidemic’ is a large outbreak, one that spreads among a population or region. An
‘outbreak’ is a sudden rise in cases of a disease in a particular place.
A handbook for journalists 5
The symptoms of COVID-19 are similar to those of the flu (influenza) or the common cold, which
are a lot more prevalent. This is why testing is required to confirm that someone has COVID-19.
Like other Coronaviruses, the Novel Coronavirus, too, is transmitted through direct contact
with respiratory droplets of an infected person (generated through coughing and sneezing), and
touching surfaces contaminated with the virus.
How can the virus be prevented from spreading?
It’s important to remember that key preventive measures for all the Coronavirus-linked diseases
are the same – frequent hand-washing and respiratory hygiene (covering your cough or sneeze
with a flexed elbow or tissue, then disposing of the tissue in a closed bin).
The COVID-19 virus may survive on surfaces for several hours, but simple disinfectants can kill
it.
Also, there is a vaccine for the flu – so remember to keep yourself and your child up-to-date with
vaccinations. 
In brief, to avoid the risk of transmission, people should:
•	 Wash their hands frequently using an alcohol-based hand rub or soap and water.
•	 Cover their mouth and nose when coughing or sneezing.
•	 Avoid close contact with anyone who has a fever and cough.
•	 Seek medical care early if they have fever, cough and difficulty breathing.
•	 Share previous travel history with their healthcare provider.
6 Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) Pandemic
Chapter 2
Fact check
As with other diseases, there are a lot of myths and incomplete or inaccurate information being
bandied about regarding the Novel Coronavirus, especially as it is a new disease. Journalists,
who are under pressure during the crisis to come out with reports in various branches of the media
on the evolving situation, are in danger of falling into the trap of disseminating such myths and
inaccuracies as ‘facts’. Before putting out articles, features, reports or audio-visual programmes,
use the ready reckoner of Frequently Asked Questions below as a cheat sheet to quickly identify
whether the information you have is authentic and endorsed by reliable authorities.
1. Can cold weather and snow kill the Novel Coronavirus?
There is no reason to believe that cold weather can kill the Novel Coronavirus and linked
diseases. The normal human body temperature remains around 36.5°C to 37°C, regardless
of the external temperature or weather. The most effective way to protect yourself against
the Novel Coronavirus is by frequently cleaning your hands with an alcohol-based hand rub
or washing them with soap and water.
2. Does taking a hot bath prevent COVID-19?
Taking a hot bath will not prevent you from catching COVID-19. Your normal body
temperature remains around 36.5°C to 37°C, regardless of the temperature of your bath
or shower. Actually, taking a hot bath with extremely hot water can be harmful, as it can 
A handbook for journalists 7
burn you. The best way to protect yourself against COVID-19 is by frequently cleaning
your hands. By doing this you eliminate viruses that may be on your hands, and thus avoid
infection that could happen when you touch your eyes, mouth and nose.
3. Can the Novel Coronavirus be transmitted through goods manufactured in
China or any country reporting COVID-19 cases?
Even though the NovelCoronavirus can stay on surfaces for a few hours or up to several days
(depending on the type of surface), it is very unlikely that the virus will persist on a surface
after being transported over long distances and exposed to different weather conditions
and temperatures. If you think a surface may be contaminated, use a disinfectant to clean
it. After touching it, clean your hands with an alcohol-based hand rub or wash them with
soap and water.
4.	 Is the Novel Coronavirus transmitted through mosquito bites?
To date, there has been no information or evidence to suggest that the NovelCoronavirus
could be transmitted by mosquitoes. It is a respiratory virus which spreads primarily
through droplets generated when an infected person coughs or sneezes, or through droplets
of saliva or discharge from the nose. To protect yourself, clean your hands frequently with
an alcohol-based hand rub or wash them with soap and water. Also, avoid close contact with
anyone who is coughing and sneezing.
8 Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) Pandemic
5.	 Are hand-dryers effective in killing the Novel Coronavirus?
No, hand-dryers are not effective in killing the 2019-nCoV. To protect yourself against the
Novel Coronavirus, you should frequently clean your hands with an alcohol-based hand
rub or wash them with soap and water. Once your hands are clean, dry them thoroughly by
using paper towels or a warm air-dryer.
6.	 Can an ultraviolet disinfection lamp kill the Novel Coronavirus?
UV lamps should not be used to sterilise hands or other areas of skin as UV radiation can
cause skin irritation.
7. How effective are thermal scanners in detecting people infected with the Novel
Coronavirus?
Thermal scanners are effective in detecting people who have developed a fever (those
who have a higher than normal body temperature) because of the 2019-nCoV infection.
However, they cannot detect people who are infected but do not as yet have an elevated
temperature. This is because it takes between two and ten days for people who are infected
to become sick and develop a fever.
A handbook for journalists 9
8. Can spraying alcohol or chlorine all over your body kill the Novel Coronavirus?
No, spraying alcohol or chlorine all over your body will not kill viruses that have already
entered your body. Spraying such substances can be harmful to clothes and mucous
membranes (eyes, mouth). Be aware that both alcohol and chlorine can be useful to disinfect
surfaces, but they need to be used as per appropriate recommendations.
9. Can pets spread the Novel Coronavirus?
At present, there is no evidence that companion animals/ pets such as dogs or cats can be
infected with the Novel Coronavirus. However, it is always a good idea to wash your hands
with soap and water after contact with pets. This protects you against various common
bacteria such as E. coli and Salmonella that can pass between pets and humans.
10. Do vaccines against pneumonia protect you against the Novel Coronavirus?
No, vaccines against pneumonia, such as the pneumococcal vaccine and Haemophilus
Influenza Type B (Hib) vaccine, do not provide protection against the Novel Coronavirus. 
10 Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) Pandemic
The virus is so new and different that it needs its own vaccine. Researchers are trying to
develop a vaccine against 2019-nCoV, and WHO is supporting their efforts. Although
existing vaccines are not effective against 2019-nCoV, vaccination against respiratory
illnesses is highly recommended to protect your health.
11. Can regularly rinsing your nose with a saline solution help prevent 2019-nCoV
infection?
No, there is no evidence that regularly rinsing the nose with saline water has protected
people from infection with the Novel Coronavirus.  There is some limited evidence that
regularly rinsing nose with a saline solution can help people recover more quickly from
the common cold. However, regularly rinsing the nose has not been shown to prevent
respiratory infections.
12. Can eating garlic help prevent 2019-nCoV infection?
Garlic is a healthy food that may have some antimicrobial properties. However, there is
no evidence from the current outbreak that eating garlic protects people from the New
Coronavirus.
A handbook for journalists 11
13. Does the New Coronavirus affect only older people, or are younger people also
susceptible?
People of all ages can be infected by the Novel Coronavirus. Older people, and people with
pre-existing medical conditions (such as asthma, diabetes, heart disease) appear to be more
likely to become severely ill after contracting the virus.  WHO advises people of all ages
to take steps to protect themselves from the virus; for example, by following good hand
hygiene and good respiratory hygiene.
14. Are antibiotics effective in preventing and treating the New Coronavirus?
No, antibiotics do not work against viruses, only bacteria. The 2019-nCoV is a virus and,
therefore, antibiotics should not be used as a means of prevention or treatment. However,
if you are hospitalised for the 2019-nCoV, you may receive antibiotics because bacterial coinfection is possible.
15. Are there any specific medicines to prevent or treat the Novel Coronavirus?
To date, there is no specific medicine recommended to prevent or treat the NovelCoronavirus.
However, those infected with the virus should receive appropriate care to relieve and treat
symptoms, and those with severe illness should receive optimized supportive care. Some
specific treatments are under investigation and will be tested through clinical trials. WHO
is working with a range of partners to accelerate research and development efforts.
12 Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) Pandemic
Chapter 3
Different perspectives
Straightforward, accurate reports backed by statistics is a given in times of crises such as this.
But apart from the general, comprehensive reportage, there are various angles of the problem
that need to be explored and brought to light, various groups with special needs which have to
be addressed. Here are some layers that journalists can explore during the COVID-19 pandemic.
The mind matters
Physical ill-health is the most direct and obvious fallout of being infected with the Novel
Coronavirus. But mental health is also compromised, as an indirect fallout. Much attention is
being devoted to this aspect, and it offers scope for meaningful reportage. The effect of the disease
on the mental health of the public hinges on the stress that it has created. An understanding of
the stressors will help journalists generate articles and programmes which can be of significant
impact.
Specific stressors particular to COVID-19 outbreak include:
(a) risk of being infected and infecting others, especially if the transmission mode of COVID-19
is not 100 per cent clear.
(b) the fact that common symptoms of other health problems (a fever, for instance) can be
mistaken for COVID-19 and lead to fear of being infected.
(c) worry over children being at home alone (due to school closures) without appropriate care
and support.
(d) risk of deterioration of physical and mental health of vulnerable individuals; for example
children, older adults and people with disabilities, if caregivers are placed in quarantine and
other care and support is not in place.
(e) potential consequences of measures to contain the virus on people’s livelihoods – this
applies as much to the common man as to heads of organisations and also governments.   
Specially vulnerable groups – women and children
When it comes to health issues, women and children fall under the more susceptible categories.
They have to be seen through different lenses when portraying the effect of COVID-19. Journalists
reporting from the ground can take ideas to generate women- and child-oriented stories from the
following questions and answers: 
A handbook for journalists 13
1. Is it safe for mothers to breastfeed their babies if they are infected or suspect
that they are infected with 2019-nCoV?  
Mothers in affected and at-risk areas with symptoms of fever, cough or difficulty breathing
should seek medical care early, and follow instructions from a healthcare provider.
Considering the benefits of breastfeeding and the insignificant role of breastmilk in
transmission of other respiratory viruses, the mother could continue breastfeeding. 
However, precautions should be taken, as there is a risk of transmission from mother to
infant through respiratory droplets and direct contact, as well as indirectly through contact
with contaminated surfaces. These precautions include wearing a mask when feeding
the child, washing hands before and after feeds, and cleaning/ disinfecting contaminated
surfaces.  If a mother is too ill, she should be encouraged to express milk and give it to
the child via a clean cup and/or spoon – all while following the same infection prevention
methods. 
2. Can pregnant women pass the Coronavirus to unborn children?  
At this time, there is not enough evidence to determine whether the virus is transmitted
from a mother to her baby during pregnancy and delivery. Nor is there conclusive evidence
regarding the potential impact this may have on the baby. All pregnant women should be
advised to follow appropriate precautions to protect themselves from exposure to the virus,
closely monitor themselves for symptoms of COVID-19 and seek advice from the nearest
designated facility throughout the course of the pregnancy.  
3. Does COVID-19 affect children?
This is a new virus and we do not know enough yet about how it affects children or pregnant
women. We know it is possible for people of any age to be infected with the virus, but so
far there have been relatively few cases of COVID-19 reported among children. The virus is
fatal in rare cases, so far mainly among older people with pre-existing medical conditions.
4. How can a parent or caregiver support a child to learn at home if schools are
closed?
Parents and caregivers should be prepared to support their children to continue to learn
at home, including by reading, learning through play, working together on assignments
shared by schools, and supporting safe engagement with online learning platforms where
available, as well as by tuning in to educational radio and TV programmes.
5. What should parents and caregivers know about online or remote learning?
UNICEF is supporting online and remote learning in coordination with national
governments and other local partners. It is important to: 
14 Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) Pandemic
•	 Engage actively in children’s learning – Use technology as one component of a
learning experience that includes human interaction, recognising that technology
alone cannot replace teachers or parental presence and guidance. This is especially true
for younger children.
•	 Protect children’s data – Parents and caregivers should check the digital resources
children are accessing and protect them from those that do not seem safe or that require
detailed personal information. Children’s identity, location and ethnic or religious
affiliations should not be required information to access learning resources.   
6. How can teachers support children to learn if schools are closed?
Teachers across the globe, in addition to engaging with digital learning platforms,
are setting up monitoring systems with children, including WhatsApp groups and Skype
calls. Some teachers may also choose to organise small groups to remotely check children’s
homework and assign new activities.
STORY IDEAS
Apart from these angles, journalists may also focus on
1.	 In-depth reports on a specific response to social problems caused by COVID-19
2.	 An exploration of how the response is implemented, and how it works
3.	 An examination of the evidence, both qualitative and quantitative, of what is known
so far about the effectiveness of the response
4.	 Explaining the caveats and limitations of the response
A handbook for journalists 15
Chapter 4
The ethics and etiquette of
covering the pandemic
Reportage on the spread of the Novel Coronavirus can be completely factual, statisticsbased analytical pieces, opinion pieces, human interest stories, or a mix of all these. As with
reporting of any sort, accuracy should be given prime importance. Along with that, journalists
have to exercise sensitivity while reporting about ongoing developments and while mentioning
specific cases. They have to ensure fair and impartial reporting, while respecting the privacy and
sentiments of individuals, particularly those who have lost loved ones or are facing traumas like
unemployment, financial insecurity, displacement or neglect.
Dos & Don’ts for Journalists
Here are some DOs and DON’Ts on reporting about the Novel Coronavirus
DOs DON’Ts
Report about the New Coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) with the support of facts and
information from authentic sources.
Do not attach locations or ethnicity to the
disease. Remember, viruses don’t target people
from specific populations, ethnicities, or racial
backgrounds.
Use terms like ‘people who have COVID-19’,
‘people who are being treated for COVID-19’,
‘people who are recovering from COVID-19’ or
‘people who died after contracting COVID-19’
Do not refer to people with the disease as
‘COVID-19 cases’ or ‘victims’
Talk of people ‘acquiring’ or ‘contracting’
COVID-19. 
Do not talk about people ‘transmitting
COVID-19’, ‘infecting others’ or ‘spreading
the virus’ as it implies intentional transmission
and assigns blame.
Be accurate about the risks of contracting
COVID-19; base your work on scientific data
and latest official health advice.
Do not repeat or share unconfirmed reports,
and avoid using hyperbolic language designed
to generate fear, such as ‘plague’, ‘apocalypse’,
etc.
Talk positively and emphasise the importance
of effective prevention measures, including
following rules on social distancing, staying
at home, and frequently washing hands with
soap and water.
Do not promote traditional and unscientific
hygiene practices which can lead to social
isolation, stigma and discrimination.
16 Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) Pandemic
When interviewing people who are suffering
due to the pandemic, be respectful of their
sentiments and emotions.
Do not add to the trauma of people who are
already finding it hard to cope, by insisting on
answers to painful questions, unnecessarily
exposing their vulnerabilities or rekindling
grief or anger.
Stay safe. Take proper precautions while
covering stories from the field. Practise hand
hygiene and respiratory hygiene and maintain
adequate distance from other people.
Do not expose yourself to the risk of getting
infected. Don’t shake hands or have physical
contact while greeting people in the field.
SAFETY FIRST
Journalists are expected to report from the frontline during the COVID-19 crisis and are given
entry into places and situations from where the general public is barred. But this does not mean
that journalists are invincible. They are responsible for their own safety, their professional
community and family. Hence they need to take every precaution against an infection.
Steps to protect yourself from COVID-19
Stay aware of the latest information on the COVID-19 outbreak, available on the WHO website
and through your national and local public health authority. Most people who become infected
experience mild illness and recover, but it can be more severe for others. Take care of your health
and protect others by doing the following:
1. Clean your hands often
•	 Wash your hands often with soap and water for at least 20
seconds especially after you have been in a public place, or
after blowing your nose, coughing, or sneezing.
•		 If soap and water are not readily available, use a hand sanitizer
that contains at least 60 per cent alcohol. Cover all surfaces of
your hands and rub them together until they feel dry.
•		 Avoid touching your eyes, nose, and mouth with unwashed
hands.
2. Avoid close contact
•	 Avoid close contact with people who are sick
•		 Put  a distance between yourself and other  people  if
COVID-19 is spreading in your community. This is
especially important for  people who are at higher risk of
getting very sick.
•		 Maintain at least a one-metre (3-foot) distance between
yourself and anyone who is coughing or sneezing.
•		 Avoid physical contact while greeting people. You may do namaste, nod or bow. 
A handbook for journalists 17
3. Stay home if you’re sick
•		 Stay home if you are sick, except when you need to access
medical care
•		 If you develop symptoms of cough, fever, tiredness and
difficulty in breathing, contact a doctor immediately.
4. Cover coughs and sneezes
•	 Cover your mouth and nose with a tissue when you cough or
sneeze, or use the inside of your elbow.
•		 Throw used tissues in the trash.
•		 Immediately  wash your hands  with soap and water for at
least 20 seconds. If soap and water are not readily available,
clean your hands with a hand sanitizer that contains at least 60% alcohol.
5. Wear a facemask if you are sick
•	 If you are sick: You should wear a facemask when you are
around other people (for example, sharing a room or vehicle)
and before you enter a healthcare provider’s office. If you are
not able to wear a facemask (for example, because it causes
trouble breathing), then you should do your best to cover
your coughs and sneezes, and people who are caring for you
should wear a facemask if they enter your room. 
•		 If you are NOT sick: You do not need to wear a facemask unless you are caring for
someone who is sick (and they are not able to wear a facemask). Facemasks may be
in short supply and they should be saved for caregivers. You could, however, wear
home-made cloth face masks that can be reused after they are washed.
6. Clean and disinfect
•	 Clean AND disinfect frequently touched surfaces daily. This
includes tables, doorknobs, light switches, countertops, handles,
desks, toilets, faucets and sinks, as also microphones, recorders,
computers, smartphones and telephones.
•	 If surfaces are dirty, clean them: Use detergent or soap and water
prior to disinfection.
IMPORTANT: If you are in or have recently visited (past 14 days) areas where COVID-19 is
spreading, take steps to quarantine yourself until you are sure that you are
neither infected nor a carrier.
18 Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) Pandemic
Chapter 5
Some reliable sources of
information
1. World Health Organization COVID-19 - https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/
novel-coronavirus-2019
2. Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India - https://www.mohfw.gov.in
3. Tamil Nadu Government - www.stopcoronatn.in
4. The Lancet - resource page: https://www.thelancet.com/coronavirus
5. CDC site - https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/index.html
6. UNDP coronavirus updates - https://www.undp.org/content/undp/en/home/covid-19-
pandemic-response.html
7. Springer Nature research covid resources https://www.springernature.com/gp/researchers/
campaigns/coronavirus
8. Indian Scientists’ Response to COVID - https://indscicov.in
9. ICMR page on COVID-19 - https://www.icmr.nic.in/content/covid-19
10. UNICEF – www.unicef.org
A handbook for journalists 19
Awareness material
20 Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) Pandemic
A handbook for journalists 21
22 Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) Pandemic
UNICEF State Office
for Tamil Nadu & Kerala
No. 1, 3rd Cross Street, Raja Garden
Kottivakkam, Chennai - 600041
E-mail: suroy@unicef.org
Press Institute of India
2nd Main Road, CPT Campus
Taramani
Chennai – 600113
E-mail: editorpiirind@gmail.com